= Linguistics

docs :: http://deveiate.org/code/linguistics
project :: https://bitbucket.org/ged/linguistics
github :: https://github.com/ged/linguistics


== Description

Linguistics is a framework for building linguistic utilities for Ruby
objects in any language. It includes a generic language-independant
front end, a module for mapping language codes into language names, and
a module which contains various English-language utilities.


== Usage

The Linguistics module comes with a language-independant mechanism for
extending core Ruby classes with linguistic methods.

It consists of three parts: a core linguistics module which contains the
class-extension framework for languages, a generic inflector class that
serves as an extension point for linguistic methods on Ruby objects, and
one or more language-specific modules which contain the actual
linguistic functions.

The module works by adding a single instance method for each language
named after the language's two-letter code (or three-letter code, if no
two-letter code is defined by ISO639) to various Ruby classes. This
allows many language-specific methods to be added to objects without
cluttering up the interface or risking collision between them, albeit at
the cost of three or four more characters per method invocation. For
example:

    Linguistics.use( :en )
    "goose".en.plural
    # => "geese"

If you prefer monkeypatching (around 70) linguistics methods directly onto core
classes, you can do that by adding a 'monkeypatch' option to ::use:

    Linguistics.use( :en, monkeypatch: true )
    "goose".plural
    # => "geese"

=== Controlling Which Classes Get Extended

If you should wish to extend classes other than the ones in
<tt>Linguistics::DEFAULT_EXT_CLASSES</tt>, you have a few options.

You can modify the DEFAULT_EXT_CLASSES array directly (before you call
::use, of course):

    Linguistics::DEFAULT_EXT_CLASSES << MyClass

You can also pass an Array of classes to .use:

    Linguistics.use( :en, classes: [MyClass] )

Or you can add language methods to classes via mixin:

    class MyClass
        include Linguistics::EN
    end

All Linguistics methods use Ruby's casting mechanism, so at a minimum,
your classes should provide an implementation of #to_s that returns
words or phrases.


=== Adding Language Modules

To add a new language to the framework, define a module that will act as
the top-level namespace for all your linguistic functions, and then
register it as being available, like so:

    module Linguistics::TLH

        # Add Klingon to the list of default languages
        Linguistics.register_language( :tlh, self )

    end

The first argument is either the two- or three-letter [ISO 639.2]
(http://www.loc.gov/standards/iso639-2/php/code_list.php) language code
for the language you're registering.

The second is the container module itself.

After you register your language, each class that Linguistics is told to
extend will have a method for your language code/s:

    irb> Linguistics.use( :tlh, :classes => Object )
    # => [Object]
    irb> Object.new.tlh
    # => #<(Klingon; tlhIngan-Hol-language inflector) for <Object:0x402d9674> >

If you use RSpec 2, you can test out any API requirements of the module
by requiring  'linguistics/languagebehavior' and adding a shared
behavior to your spec:

    require 'rspec'
    require 'linguistics/languagebehavior'

    describe Linguistics::TLH do

      it_should_behave_like "a Linguistics language module"

      # ... any other specs for your module

    end

If you wish to use the logging subsystem set up by Linguistics, you can
do so one of two ways: by logging to the logger directly:

    Linguistics.log.debug "Registering Klingon language extension"

or by mixing the `Linguistics::Loggable' module into your class/module,
which will give you a 'log' method that prepends the object class on
each log message so it's easy to filter out the ones you want:

    require 'linguistics/mixins'
    class Linguistics::TLH::Generator
        include Linguistics::Loggable

        def generate_it
            self.log.debug "starting generation..."
        end
    end



== English Language Module

Linguistics comes with an English-language module; see the API
documentation for Linguistics::EN for more information about it.


== Authors

* Michael Granger <ged@FaerieMUD.org>
* Martin Chase <stillflame@FaerieMUD.org>


== Contributors

* Robert Berry (bdigital on github) - English conjugation ported from
  MorphAdorner


== Requirements

* Ruby >= 1.9.3

It may work under earlier versions, but I'll only be testing it on 1.9.3
or later.


== Optional

The English-language module for Linguistics has support for a few other
optional natural-language libraries:

linkparser[http://deveiate.org/projects/Ruby-LinkParser] ::
  Ruby high-level interface to the CMU Link Grammar library

wordnet[http://deveiate.org/projects/Ruby-WordNet] ::
  Adds integration for the Ruby binding for the WordNet®
  lexical refrence system.


== Contributing

You can check out the current development source with Mercurial via its
{project page}[http://deveiate.org/projects/Linguistics]. Or if you prefer
Git, via {its Github mirror}[https://github.com/ged/linguistics].

After checking out the source, run:

    $ rake newb

This task will install any missing dependencies, run the tests/specs, and
generate the API documentation.


== License

Copyright (c) 2003-2012, Michael Granger
All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
  and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

* Neither the name of the author/s, nor the names of the project's
  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this
  software without specific prior written permission.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.



